README.md, before:


ppm.c - OpenLDAP password policy module

version 1.7

ppm.c is an OpenLDAP module for checking password quality when they are modified.
Passwords are checked against the presence or absence of certain character classes.

This module is used as an extension of the OpenLDAP password policy controls,
see slapo-ppolicy(5) section pwdCheckModule.

contributions
-------------

* 2014 - 2017 - David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com> - maintainer
* 2015 - Daly Chikhaoui - Janua <dchikhaoui@janua.fr> - contribution on RDN checks
* 2017 - tdb - Tim Bishop - contribution on some compilation improvements


INSTALLATION
------------

See INSTALL file


USAGE
-----

Create a password policy entry and indicate the fresh compiled
library ppm.so:

dn: cn=default,ou=policies,dc=my-domain,dc=com
objectClass: pwdPolicy
objectClass: pwdPolicyChecker
objectClass: person
objectClass: top
cn: default
sn: default
pwdAttribute: userPassword
pwdCheckQuality: 2
...
pwdCheckModule: /path/to/new/ppm.so
pwdCheckModuleArg: [see configuration section]


See slapo-ppolicy for more information, but to sum up:
- enable ppolicy overlay in your database.
This example show the activation for a slapd.conf file
(see slapd-config and slapo-ppolicy for more information for
 cn=config configuration)

```
overlay ppolicy
ppolicy_default "cn=default,ou=policies,dc=my-domain,dc=com"
#ppolicy_use_lockout   # for having more infos about the lockout
```

- define a default password policy in OpenLDAP configuration or
use pwdPolicySubentry attribute to point to the given policy.




Password checks
---------------

- 4 character classes are defined by default:
upper case, lower case, digits and special characters.

- more character classes can be defined, just write your own.

- passwords must match the amount of quality points.
A point is validated when at least m characters of the corresponding
character class are present in the password.

- passwords must have at least n of the corresponding character class
present, else they are rejected.

- the two previous criterias are checked against any specific character class
defined.

- if a password contains any of the forbidden characters, then it is
rejected.

- if a password contains tokens from the RDN, then it is rejected.

- if a password is too long, it can be rejected.

- if a password does not pass cracklib check, it can be rejected.


Configuration
-------------

Since OpenLDAP 2.5 verspion, ppm configuration is held in a binary
attribute of the password policy: pwdCheckModuleArg
The configuration file (/etc/openldap/ppm.conf by default) is to be
considered as an example configuration, to import in the pwdCheckModuleArg
attribute. It is also used for testing passwords with the test program
provided.
If for some reasons, any parameter is not found, it will be given its
default value.

Note: you can still compile ppm to use the configuration file, by enabling
PPM_READ_FILE in ppm.h (but this is deprecated now). If you decide to do so,
you can use the PPM_CONFIG_FILE environment variable for overloading the
configuration file path.

The syntax of a configuration line is:
parameter value [min] [minForPoint]

with spaces being delimiters and Line Feed (LF) ending the line.
Parameter names ARE case sensitive.

The default configuration is the following:

```
# minQuality parameter
# Format:
# minQuality [NUMBER]
# Description:
# One point is granted for each class for which MIN_FOR_POINT criteria is fulfilled.
# defines the minimum point numbers for the password to be accepted.
minQuality 3

# checkRDN parameter
# Format:
# checkRDN [0 | 1]
# Description:
# If set to 1, password must not contain a token from the RDN.
# Tokens are separated by the following delimiters : space tabulation _ - , ; £
checkRDN 0

# forbiddenChars parameter
# Format:
# forbiddenChars [CHARACTERS_FORBIDDEN]
# Description:
# Defines the forbidden characters list (no separator).
# If one of them is found in the password, then it is rejected.
forbiddenChars

# maxConsecutivePerClass parameter
# Format:
# maxConsecutivePerClass [NUMBER]
# Description:
# Defines the maximum number of consecutive character allowed for any class
maxConsecutivePerClass 0

# useCracklib parameter
# Format:
# useCracklib [0 | 1]
# Description:
# If set to 1, the password must pass the cracklib check
useCracklib 0

# cracklibDict parameter
# Format:
# cracklibDict [path_to_cracklib_dictionnary]
# Description:
# directory+filename-prefix that your version of CrackLib will go hunting for
# For example, /var/pw_dict resolves as /var/pw_dict.pwd,
# /var/pw_dict.pwi and /var/pw_dict.hwm dictionnary files
cracklibDict /var/cache/cracklib/cracklib_dict

# classes parameter
# Format:
# class-[CLASS_NAME] [CHARACTERS_DEFINING_CLASS] [MIN] [MIN_FOR_POINT]
# Description:
# [CHARACTERS_DEFINING_CLASS]: characters defining the class (no separator)
# [MIN]: If at least [MIN] characters of this class is not found in the password, then it is rejected
# [MIN_FOR_POINT]: one point is granted if password contains at least [MIN_FOR_POINT] character numbers of this class
class-upperCase ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ 0 1
class-lowerCase abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 0 1
class-digit 0123456789 0 1
class-special <>,?;.:/!§ù%*µ^¨$£²&é~"#'{([-|è`_\ç^à@)]°=}+ 0 1
```

Example
-------

With this policy:
```
minQuality 4
forbiddenChars .?,
checkRDN 1
class-upperCase ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ 0 5
class-lowerCase abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 0 12
class-digit 0123456789 0 1
class-special <>,?;.:/!§ù%*µ^¨$£²&é~"#'{([-|è`_\ç^à@)]°=}+ 0 1
class-myClass :) 1 1``
```

the password

ThereIsNoCowLevel)

is working, because,
- it has 4 character classes validated : upper, lower, special, and myClass
- it has no character among .?,
- it has at least one character among : or )

but it won't work for the user uid=John Cowlevel,ou=people,cn=example,cn=com,
because the token "Cowlevel" from his RDN exists in the password (case insensitive).


Logs
----
If a user password is rejected by ppm, the user will get this type of message:

Typical user message from ldappasswd(5):
  Result: Constraint violation (19)
  Additional info: Password for dn=\"%s\" does not pass required number of strength checks (2 of 3)

A more detailed message is written to the server log.

Server log:

```
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Opening file /etc/openldap/ppm.conf
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = minQuality, value = 3, min = (null), minForPoint= (null)
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted replaced value: 3
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = forbiddenChars, value = , min = (null), minForPoint= (null)
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted replaced value:
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = class-upperCase, value = ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ, min = 0, minForPoint= 5
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted replaced value: ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = class-lowerCase, value = abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz, min = 0, minForPoint= 12
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted replaced value: abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = class-digit, value = 0123456789, min = 0, minForPoint= 1
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted replaced value: 0123456789
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = class-special, value = <>,?;.:/!Â§Ã¹%*Âµ^Â¨$Â£Â²&Ã©~"#'{([-|Ã¨`_\Ã§^Ã @)]Â°=}+, min = 0, minForPoint= 1
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted replaced value: <>,?;.:/!Â§Ã¹%*Âµ^Â¨$Â£Â²&Ã©~"#'{([-|Ã¨`_\Ã§^Ã @)]Â°=}+
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = class-myClass, value = :), min = 1, minForPoint= 1
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted new value:
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: 1 point granted for class class-upperCase
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: 1 point granted for class class-lowerCase
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: 1 point granted for class class-digit
```


Tests
-----

There is a unit test script: "unit_tests.sh" that illustrates checking some passwords.
It is possible to test one particular password using directly the test program:

```
cd /usr/local/openldap/lib64
LD_LIBRARY_PATH=. ./ppm_test "uid=test,ou=users,dc=my-domain,dc=com" "my_password" "/usr/local/openldap/etc/openldap/ppm.conf" && echo OK
```



HISTORY
-------
* 2018-03-30 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  various minor improvements provided by Tim Bishop (tdb) (compilation, test program,
  imprvts in Makefile: new OLDAP_SOURCES variable pointing to OLDAP instal. directory
  Version 1.7
* 2017-05-19 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  Adds cracklib support
  Readme adaptations and cleaning
  Version 1.6
* 2017-02-07 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  Adds maxConsecutivePerClass (idea from Trevor Vaughan / tvaughan@onyxpoint.com)
  Version 1.5
* 2016-08-22 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  Get config file from environment variable
  Version 1.4
* 2014-12-20 Daly Chikhaoui <dchikhaoui@janua.fr>
  Adding checkRDN parameter
  Version 1.3
* 2014-10-28 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  Adding maxLength parameter
  Version 1.2
* 2014-07-27 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  Changing the configuration file and the configuration data structure
  Version 1.1
* 2014-04-04 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  Version 1.0

Commit message:

adapt ppm to future OpenLDAP 2.5 release

README.md, after:


ppm.c - OpenLDAP password policy module

version 2.0

ppm.c is an OpenLDAP module for checking password quality when they are modified.
Passwords are checked against the presence or absence of certain character classes.

This module is used as an extension of the OpenLDAP password policy controls,
see slapo-ppolicy(5) section pwdCheckModule.

contributions
-------------

* 2014 - 2017 - David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com> - maintainer
* 2015 - Daly Chikhaoui - Janua <dchikhaoui@janua.fr> - contribution on RDN checks
* 2017 - tdb - Tim Bishop - contribution on some compilation improvements


INSTALLATION
------------

See INSTALL file


USAGE
-----

Create a password policy entry and indicate the fresh compiled
library ppm.so:

dn: cn=default,ou=policies,dc=my-domain,dc=com
objectClass: pwdPolicy
objectClass: pwdPolicyChecker
objectClass: person
objectClass: top
cn: default
sn: default
pwdAttribute: userPassword
pwdCheckQuality: 2
...
pwdCheckModule: /path/to/new/ppm.so
pwdCheckModuleArg: [see configuration section]


See slapo-ppolicy for more information, but to sum up:
- enable ppolicy overlay in your database.
This example show the activation for a slapd.conf file
(see slapd-config and slapo-ppolicy for more information for
 cn=config configuration)

```
overlay ppolicy
ppolicy_default "cn=default,ou=policies,dc=my-domain,dc=com"
#ppolicy_use_lockout   # for having more infos about the lockout
```

- define a default password policy in OpenLDAP configuration or
use pwdPolicySubentry attribute to point to the given policy.




Password checks
---------------

- 4 character classes are defined by default:
upper case, lower case, digits and special characters.

- more character classes can be defined, just write your own.

- passwords must match the amount of quality points.
A point is validated when at least m characters of the corresponding
character class are present in the password.

- passwords must have at least n of the corresponding character class
present, else they are rejected.

- the two previous criterias are checked against any specific character class
defined.

- if a password contains any of the forbidden characters, then it is
rejected.

- if a password contains tokens from the RDN, then it is rejected.

- if a password is too long, it can be rejected.

- if a password does not pass cracklib check, it can be rejected.


Configuration
-------------

Since OpenLDAP 2.5 verspion, ppm configuration is held in a binary
attribute of the password policy: pwdCheckModuleArg
The configuration file (/etc/openldap/ppm.conf by default) is to be
considered as an example configuration, to import in the pwdCheckModuleArg
attribute. It is also used for testing passwords with the test program
provided.
If for some reasons, any parameter is not found, it will be given its
default value.

Note: you can still compile ppm to use the configuration file, by enabling
PPM_READ_FILE in ppm.h (but this is deprecated now). If you decide to do so,
you can use the PPM_CONFIG_FILE environment variable for overloading the
configuration file path.

The syntax of a configuration line is:
parameter value [min] [minForPoint]

with spaces being delimiters and Line Feed (LF) ending the line.
Parameter names ARE case sensitive.

The default configuration is the following:

```
# minQuality parameter
# Format:
# minQuality [NUMBER]
# Description:
# One point is granted for each class for which MIN_FOR_POINT criteria is fulfilled.
# defines the minimum point numbers for the password to be accepted.
minQuality 3

# checkRDN parameter
# Format:
# checkRDN [0 | 1]
# Description:
# If set to 1, password must not contain a token from the RDN.
# Tokens are separated by the following delimiters : space tabulation _ - , ; £
checkRDN 0

# forbiddenChars parameter
# Format:
# forbiddenChars [CHARACTERS_FORBIDDEN]
# Description:
# Defines the forbidden characters list (no separator).
# If one of them is found in the password, then it is rejected.
forbiddenChars

# maxConsecutivePerClass parameter
# Format:
# maxConsecutivePerClass [NUMBER]
# Description:
# Defines the maximum number of consecutive character allowed for any class
maxConsecutivePerClass 0

# useCracklib parameter
# Format:
# useCracklib [0 | 1]
# Description:
# If set to 1, the password must pass the cracklib check
useCracklib 0

# cracklibDict parameter
# Format:
# cracklibDict [path_to_cracklib_dictionnary]
# Description:
# directory+filename-prefix that your version of CrackLib will go hunting for
# For example, /var/pw_dict resolves as /var/pw_dict.pwd,
# /var/pw_dict.pwi and /var/pw_dict.hwm dictionnary files
cracklibDict /var/cache/cracklib/cracklib_dict

# classes parameter
# Format:
# class-[CLASS_NAME] [CHARACTERS_DEFINING_CLASS] [MIN] [MIN_FOR_POINT]
# Description:
# [CHARACTERS_DEFINING_CLASS]: characters defining the class (no separator)
# [MIN]: If at least [MIN] characters of this class is not found in the password, then it is rejected
# [MIN_FOR_POINT]: one point is granted if password contains at least [MIN_FOR_POINT] character numbers of this class
class-upperCase ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ 0 1
class-lowerCase abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 0 1
class-digit 0123456789 0 1
class-special <>,?;.:/!§ù%*µ^¨$£²&é~"#'{([-|è`_\ç^à@)]°=}+ 0 1
```

Example
-------

With this policy:
```
minQuality 4
forbiddenChars .?,
checkRDN 1
class-upperCase ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ 0 5
class-lowerCase abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 0 12
class-digit 0123456789 0 1
class-special <>,?;.:/!§ù%*µ^¨$£²&é~"#'{([-|è`_\ç^à@)]°=}+ 0 1
class-myClass :) 1 1``
```

the password

ThereIsNoCowLevel)

is working, because,
- it has 4 character classes validated : upper, lower, special, and myClass
- it has no character among .?,
- it has at least one character among : or )

but it won't work for the user uid=John Cowlevel,ou=people,cn=example,cn=com,
because the token "Cowlevel" from his RDN exists in the password (case insensitive).


Logs
----
If a user password is rejected by ppm, the user will get this type of message:

Typical user message from ldappasswd(5):
  Result: Constraint violation (19)
  Additional info: Password for dn=\"%s\" does not pass required number of strength checks (2 of 3)

A more detailed message is written to the server log.

Server log:

```
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Opening file /etc/openldap/ppm.conf
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = minQuality, value = 3, min = (null), minForPoint= (null)
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted replaced value: 3
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = forbiddenChars, value = , min = (null), minForPoint= (null)
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted replaced value:
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = class-upperCase, value = ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ, min = 0, minForPoint= 5
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted replaced value: ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = class-lowerCase, value = abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz, min = 0, minForPoint= 12
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted replaced value: abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = class-digit, value = 0123456789, min = 0, minForPoint= 1
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted replaced value: 0123456789
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = class-special, value = <>,?;.:/!Â§Ã¹%*Âµ^Â¨$Â£Â²&Ã©~"#'{([-|Ã¨`_\Ã§^Ã @)]Â°=}+, min = 0, minForPoint= 1
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted replaced value: <>,?;.:/!Â§Ã¹%*Âµ^Â¨$Â£Â²&Ã©~"#'{([-|Ã¨`_\Ã§^Ã @)]Â°=}+
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: Param = class-myClass, value = :), min = 1, minForPoint= 1
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm:  Accepted new value:
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: 1 point granted for class class-upperCase
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: 1 point granted for class class-lowerCase
Jul 27 20:09:14 machine slapd[20270]: ppm: 1 point granted for class class-digit
```


Tests
-----

There is a unit test script: "unit_tests.sh" that illustrates checking some passwords.
It is possible to test one particular password using directly the test program:

```
cd /usr/local/openldap/lib64
LD_LIBRARY_PATH=. ./ppm_test "uid=test,ou=users,dc=my-domain,dc=com" "my_password" "/usr/local/openldap/etc/openldap/ppm.conf" && echo OK
```



HISTORY
-------

* 2021-02-23 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  remove maxLength attribute (#21)
  adapt the readme and documentation of ppm (#22)
  prepare ppolicy10 in OpenLDAP 2.5 (#20, #23 and #24)
  add pwdCheckModuleArg feature
  Version 2.0
* 2019-08-20 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  adding debug symbols for ppm_test,
  improve tests with the possibility to add username,
  fix openldap crash when checkRDN=1 and username contains too short parts
  Version 1.8
* 2018-03-30 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  various minor improvements provided by Tim Bishop (tdb) (compilation, test program,
  imprvts in Makefile: new OLDAP_SOURCES variable pointing to OLDAP instal. directory
  Version 1.7
* 2017-05-19 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  Adds cracklib support
  Readme adaptations and cleaning
  Version 1.6
* 2017-02-07 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  Adds maxConsecutivePerClass (idea from Trevor Vaughan / tvaughan@onyxpoint.com)
  Version 1.5
* 2016-08-22 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  Get config file from environment variable
  Version 1.4
* 2014-12-20 Daly Chikhaoui <dchikhaoui@janua.fr>
  Adding checkRDN parameter
  Version 1.3
* 2014-10-28 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  Adding maxLength parameter
  Version 1.2
* 2014-07-27 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  Changing the configuration file and the configuration data structure
  Version 1.1
* 2014-04-04 David Coutadeur <david.coutadeur@gmail.com>
  Version 1.0
